# Learning C for Programming Beginners

To learn C as your first language, you need to learn two things at the
same time:

1. How to program a computer
2. How to write programs in C

For a first-time programmer, these things are inseparable.  C may not
be the simplest choice for a first programming language, but on the
other hand once you have started to get to grips with programming in
C, you will have a fair understanding of how computers really
function.

## How To Learn C as a Beginner

While lots of C programmers are entirely self-taught, I recommend
choosing learning methods which will provide you with quite a lot of
structure and guidance.  A course or a tuition can provide this, and
some books also are suitable for guiding beginners.

## Courses for Beginners

I can't suggest in-person courses that might be geographically
convenient or accessible for you, but I can recommend a remote course:
Havard's
[CS50x](https://www.edx.org/course/introduction-computer-science-harvardx-cs50x)
remote-learning course.

## Books Suitable for Programming Beginners

Introducing concepts for new programmers at the same time as teaching
the C language requires a book to strike a balance between accuracy
and accessibility.

If a book focuses too much on accuracy then it can present too much
confusing detail too early for a complete beginner to absorb it.  If a
book focuses too much on accessibility, it is possible for it to
over-simplify important concepts enough that beginners start of with
misunderstandings, wrong assumptions and gaps that some people find
difficult to identify and fix later.

Unfortunately too many books go too far in one direction or another,
and therefore the list of books I can recommend is quite short.  That
list is:

### C Programming: A Modern Approach

K. N. King's *[C Programming: A Modern
Approach](http://knking.com/books/c2/index.html)* is widely
recommended as a good introduction to programming in C.

### Effective C

Robert C. Seacord's *[Effective C](http://robertseacord.com/wp/)* is
very careful to only teach correct ideas, without simplifying or
"dumbing down".  If you can learn C from this book, you will come out
of it with fewer misconceptions than might be the case with some other
books.  On the other hand, other books might provide a gentler
learning curve (to illustrate, *Effective C* introduces the concept of
Undefined Behaviour on page 10).

### C: How to Program

*[C: How to Program](https://deitel.com/c-how-to-program-9-e/)*, by
Paul Deitel and Harvey Deitel has for a long time been recommended as
an introduction to programming in C.

## Bigger Books Are Not Necessarily Better

Unfortunately I myself did not learn C from any of the above books.
Instead I unfortunately chose an enormous doorstop of a book with a
lot of pages in it, imagining that this would provide value-for-money.

Unfortunately this wasn't the case; instead it turned out that the
book had some quality issues (perhaps small surprise for a large book,
some publishers force authors to rush the writing of large books).  I
also found that when I wanted to find out about something having a
large book provides a larger information haystack in which to locate
the needle of understanding.

The second C book I bought was the second edition of Kernighan &
Ritchie.  Since I already had some experience of programming, this
worked well for me.  It's kust under 270 pages long, and I found it
reassuring to know that the answers to my questions were in a
relatively short book and that finding the answer was likely to easier
with this than the 1000-ish page book I had started with.

## Practice Exercises

You will probably need to learn primarily with a book or a course, but
you might find these exercises useful for practice.

* [Computer Science by Example](https://cscx.org/)
   * These exercises teache Computer Science through C (or other
     languages) with a series of exercises of graduated difficulty.
   * These are probably useful for beginners who are comfortable with
     mathematical concepts, or people who already know one of the
     other supported languages, who can contrast their solution in C
     and their solution in the other language.

## Reading Code

When learning C, beginners should probably read a lot more code than
they write (and to be sure this reflects what professional programmers
usually do).  However, many teaching environments don't feature a lot
of reading code, and I don't yet have a "recommended reading list" of
good C code.

## Learning from Videos and Tutorials

If you're a beginner and try to learn C by consuming very task-focused
content (often but not only video tutorials), you will often find that
you spend a lot of time on learning activities without feeling that
you have in fact made progress.

I think this is because as a beginner you need to learn a lot of
concepts and you need to develop skills in troubleshooting problems in
C programs, while tutorial-style content doesn't often help you to
learn those things.

Some people call the resulting situation "Tutorial Hell".  See [What
exactly is tutorial
hell?](https://www.reddit.com/r/learnprogramming/comments/188ated/what_exactly_is_tutorial_hell/)
for some opinions on the problem.
